# 1 "liblats.c"
# 1 "<built-in>"
# 1 "<command-line>"
# 1 "liblats.c"
# 984 "liblats.c"
=pod

=head1 NAME

liblats.gex - GrADS Extension Library for File Subsetting and Reformatting

=head1 SYNOPSIS

=head3 GrADS Commands:

=over 4

=item

run B<set_lats> I<PARAMETER> I<VALUE> - Set internal parameters

=item

run B<query_lats> - Print internal paramaters

=item

run B<lats_grid> I<EXPR> - Set horizontal grid

=item

run B<lats_data> I<EXPR> - Write data to file

=back

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This library provides GrADS extensions (I<gex>) for interfacing to
LATS (Library of AMIP II Transmission Standards), a collection of I/O
functions for creating lon/lat gridded datasets in the GRIB, NetCDF-3,
NetCDF-4/HDF-5 and HDF-4 formats. This is the low level LATS interface
in GrADS. Usually, one uses the wrapper B<lats4d.gs> script
(L<http://opengrads.org/doc/scripts/lats4d/>) for a more user friendly
interface which has reasonable defaults for most internal parameters.

The GrADS interface to LATS is implemented by means of 4 I<User
Defined Commands> (UDCs). Most parameters defining the output file are
set by means of the B<set_lats> command; the current LATS state can
queried with command B<query_lats>. Command B<lats_grid> is used to
define the horizontal longitude/lattude grid (vertical levels are set
with the B<set_lats> command.) Command B<lats_data> is used to write a
2-dimensional (longitude x latitude) slice of a variable, for a given time
and level.

The following sub-section describes the main attributes of the LATS
library which this extension interfaces to. It has been adapted from the
original LATS manual page.

=head2 Overview of the LATS Library

LATS is a subroutine library developed by the Program for Climate
Model Diagnosis and Intercomparison (PCMDI) to output lon/lat gridded
data for the AMIP II (Atmospheric Model Intercomparison Project II)
and other intercomparison projects. In addition to outputting data,
LATS optionally performs basic quality control on the data
written. LATS outputs data in the GRIB and/or netCDF formats and
provides an interface to GrADS and VCS. The LATS library is no longer
supported by the original developers at PCMDI but remains as a viable
mechanism for producing GRID-1, NetCDF and HDF output from GrADS.

The main features of LATS are:

=over 4

=item 1

LATS is designed to output rectilinear, generally global, gridded,
spatio-temporal data. The amount of data written with a single
function call is a horizontal longitude-latitude slice of a variable.

=item 2

Data may be output in the machine-independent formats GRIB and/or
netCDF and are directly readable by GrADS.

=item 3

Acceptable variable names are prescribed. The units, datatype, and
basic structure (e.g., single-level or multi-level) are inferred from
the variable name. This information is tabled in an external, ASCII
I<parameter table>. If no parameter table is specified, a default list of
AMIP II parameters is used.

=item 4

More than one LATS file may be open simultaneously for
output. In GrADS, one usually write one file at a time.

=item 5

Data must be written in increasing time sequence. All variables in a
file share a common time frequency (e.g., hourly, monthly,
etc.). Originally LATS did not support minutes, but a patch has ben
developed in version used by GrADS to allow minutes are a valid time
sequence.

=item 6

For a given timepoint, variables, and multiple levels for a variable, may be written in any order.

=item 7

Although GrADS Version 2 uses doubles (64 bits) to store variable
data, all data written to file by this interface are floating-point or
integer. INTEGER*8), and C int data can be written.

=item 8

Data written to GRIB files are packed to a predefined bit width or
numerical precision depending on the variable. The precision and bit
width is specified in the I<parameter table> file. Floating-point data written
to netCDF files are saved as 32-bit IEEE floating-point values;
integer data are written as 32-bit 2's complement integers.

=back


=head1 ANATOMY OF A LATS BASED GRADS SCRIPT

The skeleton of a GrADS script using the LATS interface is as follows:

=over 4

=item 1.

Optionally, specify an external parameter file, with
B<set_lats> I<parmtab>.

=item 2.

Define the horizontal grid with B<lats_grid>. Define all vertical
dimensions (e.g., pressure level) with B<set_lats> I<vertdim>. If a default
surface dimension is defined for a variable, it does not
have to be redefined with B<set_lats> I<vertdim>. Grids and vertical
dimensions are shared across variables. NOTE: At
present, only one grid may be defined for a GrADS/GRIB file.

=item 3.

Create a LATS file, with B<set_lats> I<create>.

=item 4.

Optionally, set the basetime, with B<set_lats> I<basetime>.

=item 5.

For EACH AND EVERY variable to be written, declare the
variable with B<set_lats> I<var>. The LATS requirement that ALL variables
be declared up front (before writing) is necessitated by the netCDF
interface.

=item 6.

For each time-point, in increasing time order and, for each
horizontal level of each variable, write the data for this level,
time-point, with B<set_lats> I<write> and B<lats_data>.

=item 7.

Close the file, with B<set_lats> I<close>.

=back

By default, all errors are reported.

=head2 QUALITY CONTROL

LATS performs some basic quality control on the data written. The
intention is to provide a quick check of data validity. For each level
written the following statistics are calculated: range
(maximum-minimum) and area-weighted average. If a missing data flag is
defined for the variable, any missing data are ignored in calculating
the statistics. Quality control is not performed on integer-valued
variables.

A QC exception is generated if abs(average - observed_average) >
(tolerance * observed_standard_deviation). Similarly, an exception is
generated if range > (range_tolerance * observed_range). In either
case, a warning is issued, and an entry is written to the QC log
file. The values of observed_average, tolerance,
observed_standard_deviation, range_tolerance, and observed_range are
tabled in the QC section of the I<Parameter Table> file. If no entry in this
section is found for the given (variable,level_type,level), then no
quality control is performed for that level.

Data are always written, regardless of whether a QC exception is
generated.

The default name of the log file is I<lats.log>. This name is
superseded by the value of the environment variable LATS_LOG, if
defined.

=head1 COMMANDS PROVIDED

=head2 B<set_lats> I<basetime YEAR MONTH DAY HOUR>

Set the basetime for file with ID fileid. The basetime is the initial
time in which the file can be referenced. The function
returns 1 if successful, 0 if an error oc- curs.

=head2 B<set_lats> I<close>

Close the file. The function returns 1 if successful, 0 if an error
occurs.

=over 8

=item B<NOTE:>
It is important to call B<set_lats close>, to ensure that any
buffered output is written to the file.

=back

=head2 B<set_lats> I<create FILENAME>

Create a LATS file with the given I<FILENAME>, a string of length <=
256. If I<FILENME> does not end in the proper extension ('.nc' for
netCDF, '.grb' for GRIB), the extension will be appended to the path.

=head2 B<set_lats> I<convention CONVENTION>

Deprecated. Same as B<set_lats> I<format>.

=head2 B<set_lats> I<format FORMAT>

The parameter I<FORMAT> defines the data format to be written, and the
metadata convention to be followed when writing the format. The
options are:

=over 8

=item I<grads_grib>

WMO GRIB format, plus a GrADS control file and the ancillary GRIB map
file. If this format is used the time step (see B<set_lats deltat>)
must be non-zero, implying that timepoints are evenly-spaced. All
variables in a file must share the same horizontal grid. This
convention is readable with GrADS. The GRIB data may be processed by
the utility B<wgrib> shipped with most GrADS distributions.

=item I<grib>

Similar to I<grads_grib> but without a GrADS control file and the
ancillary GRIB map file.

=item I<netcdf>

NetCDF-3 format, observing the COARDS metadata standard. When this
format is specified, the calendar must be I<STANDARD>. Climatologies
are indicated by specifying I<year = 2> in B<set_lats write>. For the
I<clim> and I<climleap> calendars, the year is automatically set to
2. Files wiritten with this format are readable with GrADS.

=item I<netcdf4>

Like the I<netcdf> format, except that the files are in the new
NetCDF-4 (actually HDF-5) format.

=item I<hdf4>

Like the I<netcdf> format, except that the files are in the new HDF-4
format. Notice that in GrADS v2, NetCDF and HDF-4 files are produced
with the same GrADS executables.

=back


=head2 B<set_lats> I<calendar CALENDAR>

I<CALENDAR> is the calendar type, one of the following values:

=over 4

=item I<STANDARD>

Standard Gregorian calendar. This is the default.

=item I<NOLEAP>

365days/year, no leap years

=item I<CLIM>

Climatological time (no associated year), 365 days

=item I<CLIMLEAP>

Climatological time, 366 days

=back


=head2 B<set_lats> I<center CENTER>

I<CENTER> is the name of the modeling center or group creating the
file, a string of <= 128 characters. For GRIB output, center must
match one of the centers listed in the parameter file.

=head2 B<set_lats> I<deltat DeltaT>

I<DeltaT> is the number of time units in the time increment, where the
units are specified by frequency. For example, data which are defined
at multiples of 6 hours would be specified with

   ga-> set_lats frequency hourly
   ga-> set_lats deltat 6

Similarly, monthly average data would be indicated by

   ga-> set_lats frequency monthly
   ga-> set_lats deltat 1

Note that times may be skipped for formats other than I<GRADS_GRIB>;
the only requirement imposed by the LATS interface is that timepoints,
as specified via B<set_lats write>, be at a multiple of the time
increment, relative to the base time (the first time written).

=head2 B<set_lats> I<frequency FREQUENCY>

I<FREQUENCY> is the time frequency of variables to be written to the
file, and has one of the values:

=over 4

=item I<YEARLY>

Only the year component of time is significant. I<DeltaT> (see
B<set_lats>) is expressed in years.

=item I<MONTHLY>

The year and month components of time are significant. I<DeltaT> (see
B<set_lats>) is expressed in months. Floating-point data in the
I<GRADS_GRIB> format are compressed to 16-bits.

=item I<MONTHLY_TABLE_COMP>

The year and month components of time are significant. I<DeltaT> (see
B<set_lats>) is expressed in months. Floating-point data in the
I<GRADS_GRIB> format are compressed according to the specification in
the parameter table.

=item I<WEEKLY>

The year, month, and day component of time are significant. I<DeltaT> is
expressed in weeks.

=item I<DAILY>

The year, month, and day component of time are significant. delta is
expressed in days.

=item I<HOURLY>

The year, month, day, and hour component of time are significant.
I<DeltaT> is expressed in hours.

=item I<MINUTES>

The year, month, day, hour, and minute component of time are significant.
I<DeltaT> is expressed in minutes.

=item I<FORECAST_HOURLY>

The year, month, day, and hour component of time are significant.
I<DeltaT> is expressed in hours.

=item I<FORECAST_MINUTES>

The year, month, day, hour, and minute component of time are significant.
I<DeltaT> is expressed in minutes.

=item I<FIXED>

Data are not time-dependent, e.g., for surface type, orography, etc.
I<DeltaT> is ignored and year is set to 1 by convention.

=back

=head2 B<set_lats> I<gridtype GRIDTYPE>

Define the type of horizontal grid. I<GRIDTYPE> is GAUSSIAN for
Gaussian grids, LINEAR for evenly spaced grids, or GENERIC
otherwise. The actual horizontal grid definition is performed with
command B<lats_grid>.

=head2 B<set_lats> I<gzip COMPRESSION_LEVEL>

When writing NetCDF-4 files, specifes the level of GZIP compression to
be employed. The higher the level, the harder the library works doing
compression, usually (but not always) producing smaller files. The
default is -1, meaning no compression. Notice that only NetCDF-4 files
can be compressed. When I<COMPRESION_LEVEL> > 0 is specified with
NetCDF-3 files, the format is automatically changed to NetCDF-4. For
improving the compression effectiveness see B<set_lats> I<shave>.


=head2 B<set_lats> I<model MODEL>

I<MODEL> is the name of the model version which created this data.
comments is a string of length 256 or less , including any null-
terminator. The command returns an integer file ID, or 0 if the file
cannot be created.

=head2 B<set_lats> I<parmtab TABLE_FILENAME>

Specify an external parameter table file. I<TABLE_FILENAME> is the
pathname of a file containing a list of variable descriptions, and is
a string of length <= 256 characters. Use of an external parameter
table is optional. The location of the parameter table is determined
as follows: (1) if the command B<set_lats> I<parmtab> is issued, the
value of I<TABLE_FILENAME> is used, otherwise (2) if the environment
variable LATS_PARMS is defined, its value is used, else (3) an
internally-defined table of AMIP parameters is used. The command
returns 1 on success, 0 on failure.

=head2 B<set_lats> I<shave NBITS>

Shave I<NBITS> off the mantissa of float-point numbers. By definition,
IEEE float numbers have 24 bits dedicated for the mantissa. This
command set to zero the last I<NBITS> of the mantissa, this way
reducing entropy and improving the effectiveness of GZIP compression
(see B<set_lats> I<gzip>). I<NBITS> must be in the range [1,23]. When
I<NBITS> > 0 is specified, it automatically sets GZIP compression on
at level 2, unless the compression level has already been
set. (Currently compression is implemented only for NetCDF04 output.)

NOTE: The actual shaving algorithm, first scales the variable being written
for each horizontal layer, and then shaves bits off the mantissa. See
      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ieee_float
for additional information on IEEE float-point numbers.

=head2 B<set_lats> I<var VARNAME TIMESTAT LEVEL_ID>

Declare a variable to be written to a LATS file. fileid is the integer
file ID returned from lats_create. The variable name I<VARNAME> must
match a name in the parameter table, and is a string of length <= 128
characters.


I<TIMESTAT> is a time statistic identifier, one of:

=over 4

=item I<AVERAGE>

An average over the delta time interval frequency
defined by lats_create.

=item I<INSTANT>

The field is valid at the instan- taneous time set by the year, month,
day, hour.

=item I<ACCUM>

Accumulation during delta time interval I<DeltatT> (see B<set_lats deltat>).

=back

I<LEVID> is the ID of the vertical dimension of the variable, as
returned from B<set_lats> I<vertdim>. If the variable has a default surface
defined in the parameter table, or has no associated
vertical dimension, I<LEVID> should be 0. (Note: if levid is 0 and the
variable has a default surface defined, the netCDF representation
of the variable will not have an explicit vertical dimension, but
will have a I<level_description> attribute).

B<set_lats var> should be called exactly once for each variable to be
written to a LATS file and must be called BEFORE B<set_lats> I<write>.
The function returns the integer variable ID on success, or 0 on
failure.

=head2 B<set_lats> I<vertdim DIM_NAME LEV_TYPE LEV_1 ... LEV_N>

I<DIM_NAME> is the name of the vertical dimension (e.g., "height",
"depth", "level"), and it should not contain any whitespace
characters.

I<LEV_TYPE> is the vertical dimension type. It must match one of the level
types defined in the vertical dimension types section of the
parameterfile, e.g., I<plev, hybrid>, etc.

I<LEV_1>, ..., I<LEV_N> is a strictly monotonic list of level
values.

Multi-level variables must have a vertical dimension defined. If a
single-level (e.g., surface) variable has a default level type
specified in the parameter table, it is not necessary to call
B<set_lats> I<vertdim>, since the level type will be associated with
the variable by default. Note that the level units are determined from
the vertical dimension type table entry for name.

This command returns an integer level ID on success, or 0 on
failure.

=head2 B<set_lats> I<write VAR_ID [LEVEL]>

Specifies which variable in the file will be written next.

I<VAR_ID> is the integer variable ID returned from B<set_lats>
I<var>.

I<LEVEL> is the level value, and must match one of the levels
declared via lats_vert_dim. (Exception: if the variable was declared
with levid=0, the value of I<LEVEL> is ignored.) year is the four-digit
integer year, month is the month number (1-12), day is the day in
month (1-31), and hour is the integer hour (0-23).

=head2 B<lats_grid> I<EXPR>

Define a horizontal, longitude-latitude grid, based on the dimension
environment associated with the GrADS expression I<EXPR>. The grid
type is specified with command B<set_lats> I<gridtype>.

=head2 B<lats_data> I<EXPR>

Write a horizontal longitude-latitude cross-section of a variable
contained in the GrADS expression I<EXPR>. The actual variable on file
being written to is specified with he B<set_lats> I<write> command.

For monthly data, as specified by lats_create, day and hour are
ignored. For daily and weekly data, the hour is ignored. For fixed
data, the year, month, day, and hour are ignored. For surface
variables, lev is ignored.

This command returns 1 if successful, 0 on failure.

=head2 B<query_lats>

Prints out the value of all internal parameters.

=head1 ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

=over 4

=item LATS_PARMS

Parameter table file (supersedes internal table if
defined)

=item LATS_LOG

Log file (default: lats.log)

=back

=head1 HISTORICAL NOTES

LATS was first introduced in GrADS v1.7 in the late 1990's by Mike
Fiorino as means of producing GRIB-1/NetCDF output from GrADS. With
the introduction of GrADS v2.0 in 2008, COLA removed LATS from the
GrADS code base. In 2009, the OpenGrADS Project reintroduced LATS in
GrADS v2.0 as a User Defiend Extension, adding support for
NetCDF-3, NetCDF-4/HDF-5 and HDF-4 all from the same executable.

=head1 SEE ALSO

=over 4

=item *

L<http://opengrads.org/> - OpenGrADS Home Page

=item *

L<http://cookbooks.opengrads.org/index.php?title=Main_Page> -
OpenGrADS Cookbooks

=item *

L<http://opengrads.org/wiki/index.php?title=User_Defined_Extensions> - OpenGrADS User Defined Extensions

=item *

L<http://www.iges.org/grads/> - Official GrADS Home Page

=item *

L<http://www-pcmdi.llnl.gov> - PCMDI


=item *

L<http://www-pcmdi.llnl.gov/software/lats> - LATS

=item *

L<http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/packages/netcdf> - NetCDF

=item *

L<ftp://ncardata.ucar.edu/docs/grib/guide.txt> - GRIB

=item *

L<http://ferret.wrc.noaa.gov/noaa_coop/coop_cdf_profile.html> - COARDS

=item *

L<http://wesley.wwb.noaa.gov/wgrib.html> - wgrib

=item *

L<http://opengrads.org/doc/scripts/lats4d/> - LATS4D

=item *

L<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ieee_float> - IEEE Float numbers

=back

=head1 AUTHORS

Arlindo da Silva (dasilva@opengrads.org) wrote the GrADS UDXT
interface and created this dcumentation from the LATS manual page.
Mike Fiorino (mfiorino@gmail) wrote the actual LATS interface to
GrADS. Robert Drach, Mike Fiorino and Peter Gleckler (PCMDI/LLNL)
wrote the original LATS library.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

The code implementing the GrADS extension has been placed in the public domain.
Portions (C) 1996, Regents of the University of California.

See the source for copying conditions. There is NO warranty; not even
for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
